.NOTE man 7 man
.TH OPDIS 1 "March 2010" "opdis 1.0" "Development Tools"

.SH NAME
opdis \- disassemble binary data

.SH SYNOPSIS
opdis [\fB\-c\fR|\fB\-\-cflow\fR=\fImemspec\fR]
      [\fB\-l\fR|\fB\-\-linear\fR[=\fImemspec\fR]]
      [\fB\-a\fR|\fB\-\-architecture\fR=\fIname\fR]
      [\fB\-s\fR|\fB\-\-syntax\fR=\fIatt\fR|\fIintel\fR]
      [\fB\-f\fR|\fB\-\-format\fR=\fIfmtspec\fR]
      [\fB\-o\fR|\fB\-\-output\fR=\fIfilename\fR]
      [\fB\-d\fR|\fB\-\-debug\fR]
      [\fB\-q\fR|\fB\-\-quiet\fR]
      [\fB\-B\fR|\fB\-\-bfd\fR[=\fItarget\fR]
      [\fB\-E\fR|\fB\-\-bfd\-entry\fR\]
      [\fB\-N\fR|\fB\-\-bfd\-symbol\fR[=\fIbfdname\fR]
      [\fB\-S\fR|\fB\-\-bfd\-section\fR[=\fIbfdname\fR]
      [\fB\-m\fR|\fB\-\-map\fR=\fImapspec\fR]
      [\fB\-b\fR|\fB\-\-bytes\fR=\fIstring\fR]
      [\fB\-O\fR|\fB\-\-disassembler\-options\fR[=\fIstring\fR]
      [\fB\-\-list\-architectures\fR]
      [\fB\-\-list\-disassembler\-options\fR]
      [\fB\-\-list\-syntaxes\fR]
      [\fB\-\-list\-formats\fR]
      [\fB\-\-list\-bfd\-symbols\fR]
      [\fB\-\-dry\-run\fR]
      \fIobjfile\fR...
.br

.SH DESCRIPTION

.B opdis
disassembles binary object code according the options specified by the user. The default output is a standard disassembled listing (address + hex bytes + 1asm), and support for XML, pipe-delimited, and
custom output formats is provided.
.PP
\fBopdis\fP is a front-end to \fBlibopdis\fR, which in turn is a wrapper for \fBlibopcodes\fR, part of the GNU \fIbinutils\fR distribution. It differs from \fBobjdump\fR in the following ways:
.IP
* it can disassemble files that \fBlibbfd\fR does not support
.IP
* the user can specify the addresses to disassemble
.IP
* control-flow disassembly can be performed
.IP
* the bytes to disassemble can be specified on the command line

.SH OPTIONS

.IP \fB-c\fR \fImemspec\fR
.PD 0
.IP \fB--cflow\fR=\fImemspec\fR
.PD
Add a control flow disassembly job with entry point \fImemspec\fR.
.PD
See \fBADDRESS FORMAT\fR and \fBDISASSEMBLY\fR.

.IP \fB-l\fR [\fImemspec\fR]
.PD 0
.IP \fB--linear\fR=[\fImemspec\fR]
.PD
linear disassembly job
Add a linear disassembly job for bytes at \fImemspec\fR. If \fImemspec\fR is not supplied, opdis will disassemble all bytes in the first target starting at offset 0.
.PD
See \fBADDRESS FORMAT\fR and \fBDISASSEMBLY\fR.

.IP \fB-a\fR \fIname\fR
.PD 0
.IP \fB--architecture\fR=\fIname\fR
.PD
Set the BFD architecture for the target. The default architecture is "i386".
.PD
See \fB--list-architectures\fR.

.IP \fB-s\fR \fIatt\fR|\fIintel\fR
.PD 0
.IP \fB--syntax\fR=\fIatt\fR|\fIintel\fR
.PD
Set the assembler syntax to use for disassembly. This allows the user to select from the print_insn functions provided by libopcodes for the x86 architecture. This option is ignored for non-x86 targets. TheR default value is \fIatt\fR.
.PD
See \fB--list-syntaxes\fR.

.IP \fB-f\fR \fIformat_string\fR
.PD 0
.IP \fB--format\fR=\fIformat_string\fR
.PD
Set the output format. The supported formats are:
.IP
\fIasm\fR : Print the raw output of libopcodes with the VMA of each instruction included as a trailing comment.
.IP
\fIdelim\fR : Print all components of each instruction and operand in a pipe-delimited format. The format for each instruction is
.PP
\fBoffset|vma|bytes|ascii|prefixes|mnemonic|isa|category|flags|op1|op2|\fR...
.IP
Note that the number of operand fields is variable, and could be zero. This means that the pipe-delimited format is irregular: one line may have multiple operand fields, while another line will have none.
.IP
The format for each operand is
.IP
\fBascii:category:flags:value[:name]\fR
.IP
The \fBname\fR field only appears if the operand is named (e.g. TARGET,DEST,SRC). The \fBvalue\fR field will have one of the following formats, depending on the \fBcategory\fR field:
.IP
\fB{ascii;id;size;flags}\fR for \fIregister\fR operands
.IP
\fB{segment_reg;offset}\fR for \fIabsolute\fR operands
.IP
\fB{base_reg;index_reg;scale;shift_op;segment_reg;displacement}\fR for \fIexpression\fR operands
.IP
All other operand categories display the immediate value. 
.IP
\fIdump\fR : Print the VMA of each instruction followed by the instruction bytes, prefixes, mnemonic, operand ascii values, and instruction comments.
.IP
\fIxml\fR : Print the complete instruction and operand data structures in XML format, with an embedded DTD.
.IP
fmt_str : An sprintf-style format string for custom output formats.
.PD
See \fBFORMAT STRINGS\fR.
.PP
The default value is \fIdump\fR.
.PD
See \fB--list-formats\fR.

.IP \fB-o\fR \fIfilename\fR
.PD 0
.IP \fB--output\fR=\fIfilename\fR
.PD
Set the output file to print the disassembly to. The default is STDOUT.

.IP \fB-d\fR
.PD 0
.IP \fB--debug\fR
.PD
Print \fBlibopdis\fR debug messages to STDERR.

.IP \fB-q\fR
.PD 0
.IP \fB--quiet\fR
.PD
Suppress runtime messages.

.IP \fB-B\fR \fItarget\fR
.PD 0
.IP \fB--bfd\fR=\fItarget\fR
.PD
Use \fBlibbfd\fR to load and manage the target. All \fB-l\fR and \fB-c\fR jobs will use \fBlibopdis\fR BFD routines, and memory maps for the target will be ignored. This option is not necessary if the \fB-E\fR, \fB-N\fR, or \fB-S\fR option is present.
.PD
See \fBBFD SUPPORT\fR.

.IP \fB-E\fR
.PD 0
.IP \fB--bfd-entry\fR
.PD
Add a control flow disassembly job using the BFD entry point of the file as its entry point. This will load the file using the BFD library, and will attempt to detect the target architecture.
.PD
See \fBBFD SUPPORT\fR.

.IP \fB-N\fR \fIbfdname\fR
.PD 0
.IP \fB--bfd-symbol\fR=\fIbfdname\fR
.PD
Add a control flow disassembly job using the BFD symbol \fIbfdname\fR as its entry point. This will load the file using the BFD library, and will attempt to detect the target architecture.
.PD
See \fBBFD SUPPORT\fR.

.IP \fB-S\fR \fIbfdname\fR
.PD 0
.IP \fB--bfd-section\fR=\fIbfdname\fR
.PD
Add a linear disassembly job for the contents of the BFD section named \fIbfdname\fR. This will load the file using the BFD library, and will attempt to detect the target architecture.
.PD
See \fBBFD SUPPORT\fR.

.IP \fB-m\fR \fImemspec\fR
.PD 0
.IP \fB--map\fR=\fImemspec\fR
.PD
Map bytes at an offset into a target to a VMA.
.PD
See \fBADDRESS FORMAT\fR and \fBMEMORY MAPS\fR.

.IP \fB-b\fR \fIstring\fR
.PD 0
.IP \fB--bytes\fR=\fIstring\fR
.PD
Specify bytes to disassemble. The bytes must be in a space-delimited string, and can be in octal, decimal, or hexadecimal format. The interpretation of the bytes in the string is performed by running \fBstrtoul\fR on each byte. The base can be forced by placing a directive at the start of the string: \fI\\b\fR or \fI\\B\fR for binary, \fI\o\\fR or \fI\\O\fR for octal, \fI\\d\fR or \fI\\D\fR for decimal, and \fI\\x\fR or \fI\\X\fR for hexadecimal. Any number of \fB-b\fR options can be present.
.PD See \fBTARGETS\fR.

.IP \fB-O\fR [\fIstring\fR]
.PD 0
.IP \fB--disassembler-options\fR[=\fIstring\fR]
.PD
Set the options string for the libopcodes disassembler.
.PD
See \fB--list-disassembler-options\fR.

.IP \fB--list-architectures\fR
.PD
List the supported BFD architectures.
.PD
See \fB--architecture\fR.

.IP \fB--list-disassembler-options\fR
.PD
List the libopcodes disassembler options for the target architecture.
.PD
See \fB--disassembler-options\fR and \fB-a\fR.

.IP \fB--list-syntaxes\fR
.PD
List the available syntax options.
.PD
See \fB--syntax\fR.

.IP \fB--list-formats\fR
.PD
List the available output formats.
.PD
See \fB--format\fR.

.IP \fB--list-bfd-symbols\fR
.PD
List the symbols found in a BFD target.
.PD
See \fBBFD SUPPORT\fR.

.IP \fB--dry-run\fR
.PD
Print a list of the targets, jobs, and memory maps without actually doing any disassembly.

.SH DISASSEMBLY

\fBopdis\fR implements two disassembly algorithms:
.IP
\fBlinear\fR, short for \fIlinear sweep\fR. This disassembles instructions sequentially, in the order they are encountered in the target buffer.
.IP
\fBcflow\fR, short fot \fIcontrol flow\fR. This attempts to follow the flow of execution in the target buffer, recursing to follow branch (e.g. call and jump) targets and halting disassembly when an unconditional jump or return is encountered.
.PP
\fBopdis\fR uses \fIjobs\fR to represent user requests for disassembly. Each job is composed of a choice of algorithm (i.e. linear or cflow), a target, and a VMA in the target to use as the starting address for the algorithm. In the case of BFD jobs, the algorithm is implicit, and a symbol is used in place of the VMA.
The \fB-c\fR, \fB-l\fR, \fB-E\fR, \fB-N\fR, and \fB-S\fR options are used to request disassembly jobs.
.PP
Jobs are executed in the order that they are requested. Any number of jobs may be requested. It is recommended that \fB--dry-run\fR be used to preview jobs before they are performed.
.PP
If no jobs are requested by the user, a linear disassembly of all target buffers is performed.

.SH DATA MODEL

The data model used by \fBopdis\fR and \fBlibopdis\fR uses seven types of objects: offsets, VMAs, instructions, operands, CPU registers, address expressions, and absoute addresses.
.PP
An \fBoffset\fR is a position in a target buffer. 
.PP
A \fIVirtual Memory Address\fR or \fBVMA\fR is the load address for an offset.
.PP
An \fBinstruction\fR is a memory address that has been sucessfully decoded into an assembly-language instruction. It consists of the following fields:
.IP
\fIoffset\fR : The offset of the instruction in the target buffer.
.IP
\fIvma\fR : The load address of the instruction.
.IP
\fIsize\fR : The number of bytes in the instruction.
.IP
\fIbytes\fR : The undecoded bytes of the instruction.
.IP
\fIascii\fR : The raw ASCII representation of the instruction generated by \fBlibopcodes\fR.
.IP
\fIprefixes\fR : Mnemonics for any prefix bytes preceding the instruction.
.IP
\fImnemonic\fR : The mnemonic for the instruction opcode.
.IP
\fIisa\fR : The instruction set (or subset) that the istruction belongs to, e.g 'general purpose', 'fpu', 'sse'.
.IP
\fIcategory\fR : The type of instruction, e.g. 'control flow', 'stack', 'bitwise'.
.IP
\fIflags\fR : The flags for the instruction, e.g. 'call', 'jump', 'xor'.
.IP
\fIoperands\fR : The arguments to the instruction.
.IP
\fIcomment\fR : Comments generated during disassembly.
.PP
See the \fBlibopcodes\fR API documentation for the possible values of isa, category, and flags. Note that the only fields guaranteed to be filled by the disassembler are \fIoffset\fR, \fIvma\fR, \fIsize\fR, \fIbytes\fR, and \fIascii\fR. See \fBNOTES\fR for details.
.PP
An \fBoperand\fR is an argument to an assembly language instruction. An operand can be a numeric value (also known as an \fIimmediate\fR value), a CPU \fIregister\fR, an address \fIexpression\fR, or a segment:offset address (also known as an \fIabsolute\fR address). An operand has the following fields:
.IP
\fIascii\fR : The raw ASCII representation of the operand generated by \fBlibopcodes\fR.
.IP
\fIcategory\fR : The type of operand: 'register', 'immediate', 'absolute address', or 'address expression'.
.IP
\fIflags\fR : The flags for the operand: any combination of 'read', 'write', 'exec', 'signed', 'address', and 'indirect'.
.IP
\fIvalue\fR : The value of the operand.
.PP
A \fBregister\fR operand has the following fields:
.IP
\fIascii\fR : The name of the register.
.IP
\fIflags\fR : The register flags.
.IP
\fIid\fR : The ID of the register. Registers which have different names but the same ID, e.g. %eax and %rax, are aliases of each other.
.IP
\fIsize\fR : The size of the register in bytes.
.PP
An \fBexpression\fR operand has the following fields:
.IP
\fIbase\fR : The CPU register containing the base address.
.IP
\fIindex\fR : The CPU register containing the index value to be shifted and added to the base.
.IP
\fIscale\fR : The scale )shift) factor applied to the index.
.IP
\fIshift operation\fR : The method of shifting (e.g. logical/arithmetic, left/right, shift/rotate) used in calculating the expression.
.IP
\fIdisplacement\fR : An offset or VMA added to the rest of the expression. Note: the displacement can be an absolute address.
.PP
An \fBabsolute\fR operand has the following fields:
.IP
\fIsegment\fR : The segment register.
.IP
\fIoffset\fR : An offset or VMA added to the value in the segment register. 

.SH TARGETS

A target is a buffer for disassembly. Targets may be declared in one of two ways: by specifying the specific bytes to disassemble in an argument to the \fB-b\fR option, or by declaring object file arguments on the command line. Targets are assigned an ID in the order they appear in the command line, with the first target given ID 1. The first target is always the default target for all operations. It is recommended that \fB--dry-run\fR be used to preview targets before performing disassembly.
.PP
The disassembler checks for unique addresses while disassembling, and will not disassemble addresses it has already encountered. Thus, while it is possible to combine multiple targets, the VMAs of the targets must not overlap. Note that when multiple \fB-b\fR options are provided, and the user has not specified any memory maps, \fBopdis\fR will map the bytes sequentially into memory starting at VMA 0x0. The options "-b '90 90 90 90' -b 'cc cc cc cc'" will result in a memory map from VMA 0x00-0x03 containing the contents of the first buffer, and a second map from VMA 0x04-0x07 containing the contents of the second buffer.
.PP
It is not possible to load targets with different architectures in the same invocation of \fBopdis\fR.

.SH BFD SUPPORT

\fBopdis\fR, like \fBlibopcodes\fR, supports \fIBFD\fR targets through \fBlibbfd\fR. Three additional jobs are available for BFD targets:
.IP
\fBDisassemble Entry\fR : Perform a control flow disassembly starting at the BFD entry point
.IP
\fBDisassemble Symbol\fR : Perform a control flow disassembly starting at a BFD symbol
.IP
\fBDisassemble Section\fR : Perform a linear disassembly of a BFD section
.PP
A BFD will be created for a target if one of these jobs is requested, or if the \fB-B\fR option is used.
.PP
BFD targets do not require the use of the \fB-a\fR flag as \fBlibbfd\fR will detect the architecture of the object file. For non-BFD targets, the \fB--list-architectures\fR option is provided to print a list of the target architectures supported by the local \fBlibbfd\fR.
.PP
The format for specifying a \fIbfdname\fR is
.IP
[target:]name
.PP
where \fBtarget\fR is the ID of the target containing the symbol and \fBname\fR is a valid BFD symbol. The \fBtarget\fR is only required if more than one target is being disassembled. A list of symbols found in a target can be printed to
STDOUT by using the \fB--list-bfd-symbols\fR option.

.SH MEMORY MAPS

A \fImemory map\fR associates a VMA with an offset into a target buffer. This is useful when a target buffer must appear to be at a specific load address, either to clarify the output or to combine multiple targets into a single address space. It is recommended that \fB--dry-run\fR be used to preview memory maps before performing a disassembly.
.PP
Note that memory maps are only used when creating disassembly jobs. The actual disassembler algorithms rely on ofsets from the load address of the target buffer (provided by a memory map), and do not respect the size of memory maps delcared by the user (i.e. a linear disassembly of size 0 will continue until the end of the buffer, not the end of the memory map). Memory maps are ignored for BFD targets.
.PD
See \fBADDRESS FORMAT\fR.

.SH ADDRESS FORMAT

The format for specifying an address (a \fImemspec\fR) is
.IP
	[target]:offset|@vma[+size]
.PP
where \fBtarget\fR is the ID of the target containing the address, \fBoffset\fR is the offset of the addressin the target buffer, \fBvma\fR is the load address of that offset, and \fBsize\fR is the size of the memory region being specified. The \fBtarget\fR is onlty required if more than one target is being disassembled. Either \fBoffset\fR or \fBvma\fR must be specified, except in defining memory maps when \fBvma\fR is required. The \fBsize\fR is only used to limit the number of bytes processed by linear disassembly.
.PP
Note that \fB:\fR is used to indicate that the next argument is an offset, \fB@\fR is used to indicate that the next argument is a vma, and \fB+\fR is used to indicate that the next argument is a size. This means that the arguments can appear in any order, except for target which is undelimited and must appear first.
.pp
The target, offset, and size arguments all have default values which take effect if they are not specified. The default target is 1, the ID of the first target. The default offset is 0. The default size is 0, which specifies the entirety of the target buffer.


.SH FORMAT STRINGS
Custom output formats are supported via a printf-style format string that allows the user to determine what information about an instruction or operand is printed.

.PP
.SS Component Selection
.PP
A single character specifying what metadata to print. The \fB%i\fR (instruction) and \fB%o\fR (operand) operators represent complex objects. The metadata for these objects are available as arguments to the operator, allowing the display of categories, flags, etc.
.IP
\fBA\fR
.PD
The \fBascii\fR field of the operator. This is the default, and prints the raw libopcodes representation of the object.

.IP
\fBC\fR
.PD
The \fBcategory\fR field of the object.

.IP
\fBF\fR
.PD
The \fBflags\fR field of the object. The flags are comma-delimited.

.IP
\fBI\fR
.PD
The \fBisa\fR field of the object. This is only applicable to instruction objects.

.PP
.SS Base Selection
A single character specifying the base to print addresses or bytes in.

.IP
\fBX\fR
.PD
Print data in hexadecimal format.

.IP
\fBD\fR
.PD
Print data in decimal format.

.IP
\fBO\fR
.PD
Print data in octal format.

.IP
\fBC\fR
.PD
Print the ASCII (character) value for a byte. Only applicable to the \fB%b\fR operator.

.PP
.SS Operand Selection
.PP
A single character specifying which operand to print. If the operand is not present in the instruction, nothing will be printed.

.IP
\fBa\fR
.PD
Print all operands, separated by commas.

.IP
\fBt\fR
.PD
Print the \fBtarget\fR operand of the instruction.

.IP
\fBd\fR
.PD
Print the \fBdestination\fR operand of the instruction.

.IP
\fBs\fR
.PD
Print the \fBsource\fR operand of the instruction.

.IP
\fB#\fR
.PD
Print the #th operand of the instruction, where # is a number between 0 and 9.

.PP
.SS Operators
.PP
A single character specifying what data to print.

.IP
\fB%i\fR
.PD
Print an instruction component. Can be followed by a component selection argument. By default, the \fBascii\fR component is printed.
.PD
See \fBComponent Selection\fR.

.IP
\fB%o\fR
.PD
Print one or all operands. Can be followed by an operand selection argument and/or a component selection argument (NOTE: operand selection must always precede component selection). By default, the \fBascii\fR component of all operands is printed.
.PD
See \fBOperand Selection\fR and \fBComponent Selection\fR.

.IP
\fB%b\fR 
.PD
Print the instruction bytes. Can be followed by a base selection argument. By default, the base is hexadecimal.
.PD
See \fBBase Selection\fR.

.IP
\fB%l\fR
.PD
Print the length of the instruction in bytes.

.IP
\fB%m\fR
.PD
Print the instruction \fBmnemonic\fR field.

.IP
\fB%a\fR
.PD
Print the address of the instruction. Can be followed by a \fBv\fR argument or a \fBo\fR argument to specify which address to print (vma of offset, respectively). Can be followed by a base selection argument (NOTE: address selection must precede base selection). The default is to print the VMA in hexadecimal format.
.PD
See \fBBase Selection\fR.

.IP
\fB%p\fR 
.PD
Print the instruction \fBprefixes\fR field.

.IP
\fB%c\fR
.PD
Print the instruction \fBcomment\fR field.

.IP
\fB%?\fR
.PD
Print a conditional delimiter. The delimiter, specified by the character following \fI?\fR, is only printed if next \fB%\fR directive returns a string. The intent of this operator is to allow delimiters to be printed between operands only if the operands appear in the output.

.IP
\fB%t\fR
.PD
Print a conditional tab.
.PD
See \fB%?\fR.

.IP
\fB%s\fR
.PD
Print a conditional space.
.PD
See \fB%?\fR.

.IP
\fB%n\fR
.PD
Print a conditional newline.
.PD
See \fB%?\fR.

.IP
\fB%%\fR
.PD
Print a literal '%'.
.PD
See \fB%?\fR.
	

.SH NOTES

.PP
The level of detail available to \fBopdis\fR is determined by the decoders available in \fBlibopdis\fR. Currently, \fBlibopdis\fR provides three decoders: x86 AT&T syntax, x86 Intel syntax, and generic. The AT&T syntax decoder (used by default or when \fI-s at\fR is supplied) provides the most detail, and generates output that is best suited for analysis. The generic decoder, the only decoder available for non-x86 architectures, only provides the raw libopcodes representation (the \fIascii\rR field) of the instruction and no operand information. Additional architecture-specific decoders must be added to \fBlibopdis\fR to overcome this limitation.
.PP
\fBopdis\fR does not emit instructions as they are disassembled. Instead, instructions are stored in a binary tree and printed in order of VMA after all dfisassembly jobs have completed.

.SH EXAMPLES

.PP
Disassemble an object file from its entry point:
.IP
opdis -E a.out

.PP
Disassemble an object file from the symbol 'main':
.IP
opdis -N main a.out

.PP
Disassemble the .text section of an object file:
.IP
opdis -S .text a.out

.PP
Disassemble the .text section of an object file and write to disasm.xml:
.IP
opdis -S .text -o asm.xml -f xml a.out

.PP
Perform a linear disassembly of 1024 bytes at offset 0x100 in an object file:
.IP
opdis -l :0x100+1024 a.out

.PP
Perform an intel-syntax control disassembly starting at offset 0x200 in an object file:
.IP
opdis -s intel -c :0x200 a.out

.PP
Disassemble shellcode: 
.IP
dist/opdis -b '31 c0 bb 08 84 04 08 53 89 e1 31 d2 b0 0b cd 80 00 00'
.PP
(see http://www.shell-storm.org/shellcode/files/shellcode-44.php)

.PP
Map the specified bytes to VMA 0x1000 and disassemble:
.IP
opdis -m :0@0x1000 -b '2e 2e 74 50 90'

.PP
Map target 1 to VMA 0x1000, target 2 to VMA 0x1100 and disassemble:
.IP
opdis -m 1@0x1000 -m 2@0x1100 -b '2e 2e 74 50 90' -b 'cc cc cc cc'

.PP
Print the size, bytes, and mnemonic (if present) of each instruction:
.IP
opdis -f '%l:%b%?:%m' a.out

.SH "SEE ALSO"

.IP
\fIobjdump\fR(1), \fIod\fR(1), \fIreadelf\fR(1), and the Info entries for \fIbinutils\fR.

.SH COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2010 thoughtgang.org.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 3.0
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no
Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the
section entitled "GNU Free Documentation License".              
